doc/design.rst, before:

Design Decisions in Pytato
==========================

.. currentmodule:: pytato

TODO
----

- reduction inames
- finish trawling the design doc
- expression nodes in index lambda
    - what pymbolic expression nodes are OK
    - reductions
    - function identifier scoping
    - piecewise def (use ISL?)

.. note::

    When this document refers to different ways of expressing a computation
    and transforming between them "without loss of information", what is meant
    is that the transformation is valid

    - in both directions, and
    - for all possible inputs (including those with symbolic shapes).

Computation and Results
-----------------------

-   Results of computations either implement the :class:`~Array`
    interface or are a :class:`~DictOfNamedArrays`.
    The former are referred to as :term:`array expression`\ s. The union type
    of both is referred to as an :term:`array result`.

-   Array data is computed lazily, i.e., a representation of the desired
    computation is built, but computation/code generation is not carried
    out until instructed by the user. Evaluation/computation
    is never triggered implicitly.

-   :attr:`Array.dtype` is evaluated eagerly.

-   :attr:`Array.shape` is evaluated as eagerly as possible, however
    data-dependent name references in shapes are allowed. (This implies
    that the number of array axes must be statically known.)

    Consider the example of fancy indexing::

        A[A > 0]

    Here, the length of the resulting array depends on the data contained
    in *A* and cannot be statically determined at code generation time.

    In the case of data-dependent shapes, the shape is expressed in terms of
    scalar (i.e. having a :attr:`Array.shape` of `()`) values
    with an integral :attr:`Array.dtype` (i.e. having ``dtype.kind == "i"``).
    Such an expression marks the boundary between eager and lazy evaluation.

-   There is (deliberate) overlap in what various expression nodes can
    express, e.g.

    -   Array reshaping can be expressed as a :class:`pytato.array.Reshape`
        or as an :class:`pytato.array.IndexLambda`

    -   Linear algebra operations can be expressed via :class:`pytato.array.Einsum`
        or as an :class:`pytato.array.IndexLambda`

    Expression capture (the "frontend") should use the "highest-level"
    (most abstract) node type available that captures the user-intended
    operation. Lowering transformations (e.g. during code generation) may
    then convert these operations to a less abstract, more uniform
    representation.

    Operations that introduce nontrivial mappings on indices (e.g. reshape,
    strided slice, roll) are identified as potential candidates for being captured
    in their own high-level node vs. as an :class:`~pytato.array.IndexLambda`.

    Operations that *can* be expressed as :class:`~pytato.array.IndexLambda`
    without loss of information, *should* be expressed that way.

Naming
------

-   Input arrays, i.e. instances of :class:`~pytato.array.InputArgumentBase`,
    take ``Optional[str]`` as their names. If the name has not been
    provided, :mod:`pytato` assigns unique names to those arrays
    during lowering to a target IR.

-   No two non-identical array variables referenced in an expression may
    have the same name. :mod:`pytato` will detect such uses and raise an error.
    Here, "identical" is meant in the same-object ``a is b`` sense.

-   The (array) value associated with a name is immutable once evaluated.
    In-place slice assignment may be simulated by returning a new
    node realizing a "partial replacement".

-   For arrays with data-dependent shapes, such as fancy indexing::

        A[A > 0]

    it may be necessary to automatically generate names, in this
    case to describe the shape of the index array used to realize
    the access ``A[A>0]``. These will be drawn from the reserved namespace
    ``_pt_shp``. Users may control the naming of these counts
    by assigning the tag :attr:`pytato.tags.CountNamed`, like so::

        A[(A > 0).tagged(CountNamed("mycount"))]

-   :class:`pytato.array.Placeholder` expressions, like all array expressions,
    are considered read-only. When computation begins, the same
    actual memory may be supplied for multiple :term:`placeholder name`\ s,
    i.e. those arrays may alias.

    .. note::

        This does not preclude the arrays being declared with
        C's ``*restrict`` qualifier in generated code, as they
        do not alias any data that is being modified.

.. _reserved_identifier:

Reserved Identifiers
--------------------

-   Identifiers beginning with ``_pt_`` are reserved for internal use
    by :mod:`pytato`. Any such internal use must be drawn from one
    of the following sub-regions, identified by their identifier
    prefixes:

    -   ``_pt_shp``: Used to automatically generate identifiers used
        in data-dependent shapes.

    -   ``_pt_out``: The default name of an unnamed output argument

    -   ``_pt_in``: The default name of an unnamed placeholder argument

    -   ``_pt_data``: Used to automatically generate identifiers for
        names of :class:`~pytato.array.DataWrapper` arguments that are
        not supplied by the user.

-   Identifiers used in index lambdas are also reserved. These include:

    -   Identifiers matching the regular expression ``_[0-9]+``. They are used
        as index ("iname") placeholders.

    -   Identifiers matching the regular expression ``_r[0-9]+``. They are used
        as reduction indices.

    -   Identifiers matching the regular expression ``_in[0-9]+``. They are used
        as automatically generated names (if required) in
        :attr:`pytato.array.IndexLambda.bindings`.

Tags
----

In order to convey information about the computation from DAG construction
time to processing/transformation/code generation time, each :class:`pytato.Array`
node may be tagged (via the :attr:`pytato.Array.tags` attribute) with an arbitrary
number of informational "tags". A tag is any subclass of :class:`pytools.tag.Tag`.
Guidelines for tag use:

- Tags *must not* carry semantic information; i.e. a computation must have the same
  result even if all tags are stripped.

- Tags *may* carry information related to efficient execution, i.e. it is
  permissible that evaluation of the expression is inefficient (even
  impractically so) without taking the information in the tags into
  account.

- Tags *should* be descriptive, not prescriptive.

  For example:

  - **Good:** This array is the result of differentiation.
  - **Bad:** Unroll the loops in the code computing this result.

Memory layout
-------------

:mod:`pytato` arrays do not have a defined memory layout. Any operation in :mod:`numpy`
that relies on memory layout information to do its job is undefined in :mod:`pytato`.
At the most basic level, the attribute :attr:`numpy.ndarray.strides` is not available
on subclasses of :class:`pytato.Array`.

Lessons learned
===============

Namespace object
----------------

In pytato's early days, there used to exist a ``Namespace`` type to define a
namespace for all input names within an array expression. This was however removed
in the later versions. As, in the process of associating names to array variables it
would privately hold references to :class:`~pytato.array.InputArgumentBase`
variables that could no longer be referenced by a user. This made it impossible for
the garbage collector to deallocate large :class:`~pytato.array.DataWrapper`'s,
unless the namespace itself went out-of-scope.

Glossary
========

.. glossary::

    array expression
        An object implementing the :class:`~Array` interface

    array result
        An :term:`array expression` or an instance of
        :class:`~DictOfNamedArrays`.

    identifier
        Any string for which :meth:`str.isidentifier` returns
        *True*. See also :ref:`reserved_identifier`.

    placeholder name
        See :attr:`pytato.array.Placeholder.name`.

.. vim: shiftwidth=4

Commit message:

Document reserved partitioning names (#220)
* Document reserved partitioning names

* Fix naming of data wrappers in codegen

* add func reference

Co-authored-by: Andreas Klöckner <inform@tiker.net>

* fix name

Co-authored-by: Andreas Klöckner <inform@tiker.net>

doc/design.rst, after:

Design Decisions in Pytato
==========================

.. currentmodule:: pytato

TODO
----

- reduction inames
- finish trawling the design doc
- expression nodes in index lambda
    - what pymbolic expression nodes are OK
    - reductions
    - function identifier scoping
    - piecewise def (use ISL?)

.. note::

    When this document refers to different ways of expressing a computation
    and transforming between them "without loss of information", what is meant
    is that the transformation is valid

    - in both directions, and
    - for all possible inputs (including those with symbolic shapes).

Computation and Results
-----------------------

-   Results of computations either implement the :class:`~Array`
    interface or are a :class:`~DictOfNamedArrays`.
    The former are referred to as :term:`array expression`\ s. The union type
    of both is referred to as an :term:`array result`.

-   Array data is computed lazily, i.e., a representation of the desired
    computation is built, but computation/code generation is not carried
    out until instructed by the user. Evaluation/computation
    is never triggered implicitly.

-   :attr:`Array.dtype` is evaluated eagerly.

-   :attr:`Array.shape` is evaluated as eagerly as possible, however
    data-dependent name references in shapes are allowed. (This implies
    that the number of array axes must be statically known.)

    Consider the example of fancy indexing::

        A[A > 0]

    Here, the length of the resulting array depends on the data contained
    in *A* and cannot be statically determined at code generation time.

    In the case of data-dependent shapes, the shape is expressed in terms of
    scalar (i.e. having a :attr:`Array.shape` of `()`) values
    with an integral :attr:`Array.dtype` (i.e. having ``dtype.kind == "i"``).
    Such an expression marks the boundary between eager and lazy evaluation.

-   There is (deliberate) overlap in what various expression nodes can
    express, e.g.

    -   Array reshaping can be expressed as a :class:`pytato.array.Reshape`
        or as an :class:`pytato.array.IndexLambda`

    -   Linear algebra operations can be expressed via :class:`pytato.array.Einsum`
        or as an :class:`pytato.array.IndexLambda`

    Expression capture (the "frontend") should use the "highest-level"
    (most abstract) node type available that captures the user-intended
    operation. Lowering transformations (e.g. during code generation) may
    then convert these operations to a less abstract, more uniform
    representation.

    Operations that introduce nontrivial mappings on indices (e.g. reshape,
    strided slice, roll) are identified as potential candidates for being captured
    in their own high-level node vs. as an :class:`~pytato.array.IndexLambda`.

    Operations that *can* be expressed as :class:`~pytato.array.IndexLambda`
    without loss of information, *should* be expressed that way.

Naming
------

-   Input arrays, i.e. instances of :class:`~pytato.array.InputArgumentBase`,
    take ``Optional[str]`` as their names. If the name has not been
    provided, :mod:`pytato` assigns unique names to those arrays
    during lowering to a target IR.

-   No two non-identical array variables referenced in an expression may
    have the same name. :mod:`pytato` will detect such uses and raise an error.
    Here, "identical" is meant in the same-object ``a is b`` sense.

-   The (array) value associated with a name is immutable once evaluated.
    In-place slice assignment may be simulated by returning a new
    node realizing a "partial replacement".

-   For arrays with data-dependent shapes, such as fancy indexing::

        A[A > 0]

    it may be necessary to automatically generate names, in this
    case to describe the shape of the index array used to realize
    the access ``A[A>0]``. These will be drawn from the reserved namespace
    ``_pt_shp``. Users may control the naming of these counts
    by assigning the tag :attr:`pytato.tags.CountNamed`, like so::

        A[(A > 0).tagged(CountNamed("mycount"))]

-   :class:`pytato.array.Placeholder` expressions, like all array expressions,
    are considered read-only. When computation begins, the same
    actual memory may be supplied for multiple :term:`placeholder name`\ s,
    i.e. those arrays may alias.

    .. note::

        This does not preclude the arrays being declared with
        C's ``*restrict`` qualifier in generated code, as they
        do not alias any data that is being modified.

.. _reserved_identifier:

Reserved Identifiers
--------------------

-   Identifiers beginning with ``_pt_`` are reserved for internal use
    by :mod:`pytato`. Any such internal use must be drawn from one
    of the following sub-regions, identified by their identifier
    prefixes:

    -   ``_pt_shp``: Used to automatically generate identifiers used
        in data-dependent shapes.

    -   ``_pt_out``: The default name of an unnamed output argument

    -   ``_pt_in``: The default name of an unnamed placeholder argument

    -   ``_pt_data``: Used to automatically generate identifiers for
        names of :class:`~pytato.array.DataWrapper` arguments that are
        not supplied by the user.

    -   ``_pt_part_ph``: Used to automatically generate identifiers for
        names of :class:`~pytato.array.Placeholder` that represent data
        transport across parts of a partitioned DAG
        (cf. :func:`~pytato.partition.find_partition`).

-   Identifiers used in index lambdas are also reserved. These include:

    -   Identifiers matching the regular expression ``_[0-9]+``. They are used
        as index ("iname") placeholders.

    -   Identifiers matching the regular expression ``_r[0-9]+``. They are used
        as reduction indices.

    -   Identifiers matching the regular expression ``_in[0-9]+``. They are used
        as automatically generated names (if required) in
        :attr:`pytato.array.IndexLambda.bindings`.

Tags
----

In order to convey information about the computation from DAG construction
time to processing/transformation/code generation time, each :class:`pytato.Array`
node may be tagged (via the :attr:`pytato.Array.tags` attribute) with an arbitrary
number of informational "tags". A tag is any subclass of :class:`pytools.tag.Tag`.
Guidelines for tag use:

- Tags *must not* carry semantic information; i.e. a computation must have the same
  result even if all tags are stripped.

- Tags *may* carry information related to efficient execution, i.e. it is
  permissible that evaluation of the expression is inefficient (even
  impractically so) without taking the information in the tags into
  account.

- Tags *should* be descriptive, not prescriptive.

  For example:

  - **Good:** This array is the result of differentiation.
  - **Bad:** Unroll the loops in the code computing this result.

Memory layout
-------------

:mod:`pytato` arrays do not have a defined memory layout. Any operation in :mod:`numpy`
that relies on memory layout information to do its job is undefined in :mod:`pytato`.
At the most basic level, the attribute :attr:`numpy.ndarray.strides` is not available
on subclasses of :class:`pytato.Array`.

Lessons learned
===============

Namespace object
----------------

In pytato's early days, there used to exist a ``Namespace`` type to define a
namespace for all input names within an array expression. This was however removed
in the later versions. As, in the process of associating names to array variables it
would privately hold references to :class:`~pytato.array.InputArgumentBase`
variables that could no longer be referenced by a user. This made it impossible for
the garbage collector to deallocate large :class:`~pytato.array.DataWrapper`'s,
unless the namespace itself went out-of-scope.

Glossary
========

.. glossary::

    array expression
        An object implementing the :class:`~Array` interface

    array result
        An :term:`array expression` or an instance of
        :class:`~DictOfNamedArrays`.

    identifier
        Any string for which :meth:`str.isidentifier` returns
        *True*. See also :ref:`reserved_identifier`.

    placeholder name
        See :attr:`pytato.array.Placeholder.name`.

.. vim: shiftwidth=4
